---
layout: article
title: Understanding the AppWizard and ClassWizard in Visual C++ Version 6.x by Marshall Brain
---

## Introduction to the AppWizard, ClassWizard and the Resource Editors

The Visual C++ development environment comes with three different tools
that can tremendously accelerate your software development cycle: The
AppWizard, the ClassWizard and the resource editors. The latter is a
collection of editors that you use individually to edit specific
resource types. This tutorial will introduce you to these tools in a
general way.

The *AppWizard* is a \"template generator.\" Think about what you
normally do when you begin any new project. Typically you would find
some piece of code that you know works, and then you would strip out all
of the things that you do not need from the old application. Then you
would add in all of the functionality for the new application. The
AppWizard saves you the first step. It generates a clean code template
for you to use as the starting point for any new application that you
want to create. The AppWizard gives you a number of different options as
you are creating the template, and you choose among these options
depending on what type of application you are planning to create. You
will use the AppWizard exactly once for each application you create.
After it has generated the template, the AppWizard is finished.

The template, or framework, that the AppWizard generates is an extremely
complete MFC application consisting of twenty or so different files. See
tutorial 3 for a description of these different files.

The *ClassWizard* is a tool that you can use to perform specific
modifications to an AppWizard framework. In particular, you will most
often use the ClassWizard to modify message maps, to generate new
classes derived from existing MFC classes, and to add member variables
to certain classes. The ClassWizard can also perform several other tasks
related to OLE automation code and OCX code. The ClassWizard is only
useful if you are working within a framework generated by the AppWizard.

*Resources* are user interface objects that you can create with visual
*resource editors*. Resources include bitmaps, cursors, dialogs, icons,
menus and their accelerator table, string tables and version
information. Although you could do what resources do with normal MFC
code (for example, you could hand-code a menu or a dialog using normal
MFC code written in C++), resources are generally much easier to create
and apply in a program. Therefore, the use of resources speeds your
application development cycle. Resources have the added advantage of
concentrating language-specific parts of your user interface in a
specific place that is completely separate from your C++ code. So, for
example, you can create an English, French and Spanish version of your
resources and, without changing any of your C++ code, easily create
three different versions of your application in three different
languages.

When you are creating applications using these tools, you will typically
start by creating the application\'s initial framework with the
AppWizard. The framework will include all of the normal menu options
like File Open, Edit Cut/Copy/Paste, and the Help menu. You will then
use the Resource Editors to add new menu items, dialogs, etc. to your
application. You will use the Class Wizard to modify message maps,
override virtual functions, add new classes, and so on to the
application. Because these tools do so much of the grunt work for you,
they significantly increase your development speed and reduce the number
of errors you make.
